add doc for v5.1: Deploy -> Config TiKV (#233)
tikv/website: content/docs/5.1/deploy/configure/topology.md

---
title: Topology Lable 
description: Learn how to configure topology labels.
menu:
    "5.1":
        parent: Configure TiKV
        weight: 6
---

TiKV uses topology labels (aka label) to declare its location information. PD scheduler uses the labels to optimize TiKV's failure tolerance capability. This document describes how to configure the labels.

## Declare the label hierarchy in PD

Labels are hierarchical, for example, `zone > rack > host`. You can declare it in the PD configuration file or `pd-ctl`:

- PD configuration file:
    ```toml
    [replication]
    max-replicas = 3
    location-labels = ["zone", "rack", "host"]
    ```
- pd-ctl:

    ```toml
    pd-ctl >> config set location-labels zone,rack,host
    ```

> You can find all the replication configuration options [here](../pd-configuration-file/#replication).

Reviewer: I am not sure if the document tag is called `warning`.

```suggestion
{{< warning >}}
The number of machines must be no less than the `max-replicas`.
{{< warning >}}

You can find all the replication configuration options [here](../pd-configuration-file/#replication).
```

## Declare the labels for each TiKV

> Assume that the topology has three layers: `zone > rack > host`. You can set a label for each layer by command line or configuration file, then TiKV will report its label to PD:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Assume that the topology has three layers: `zone > rack > host`. You can set a label for each layer by command line parameter or configuration file, then TiKV will report its label to PD:
```

Startup TiKV:

```bash
# zone=z1
tikv-server --labels zone=z1,rack=r1,host=h1
tikv-server --labels zone=z1,rack=r1,host=h2
tikv-server --labels zone=z1,rack=r2,host=h1
tikv-server --labels zone=z1,rack=r2,host=h2

# zone=z2
tikv-server --labels zone=z2,rack=r1,host=h1
tikv-server --labels zone=z2,rack=r1,host=h2
tikv-server --labels zone=z2,rack=r2,host=h1
tikv-server --labels zone=z2,rack=r2,host=h2

# zone=z3
tikv-server --labels zone=z3,rack=r1,host=h1
tikv-server --labels zone=z3,rack=r1,host=h2
tikv-server --labels zone=z3,rack=r2,host=h1
tikv-server --labels zone=z3,rack=r2,host=h2

# zone=z4
tikv-server --labels zone=z4,rack=r1,host=h1
tikv-server --labels zone=z4,rack=r1,host=h2
tikv-server --labels zone=z4,rack=r2,host=h1
tikv-server --labels zone=z4,rack=r2,host=h2
```

Configure PD:

```bash
# use `pd-ctl` connect the PD:
$ pd-ctl
>> config set location-labels zone,rack,host
```

Now PD will schedule replicas of the same `Region` to different data zones.

- If one data zone goes down, the TiKV cluster will still be highly available.
- If the data zone cannot recover within a period of time, PD will remove the replica from this data zone.

> PD optimizes the failure tolerance base on the topology labels. The number of machines must be no less than the `max-replicas`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

---
title: Topology
description: Learn how to configure labels.
menu:
    "5.1":
        parent: Configure TiKV
        weight: 6
---

TiKV uses labels to label its location information and PD schedulers according to the topology of the cluster, to maximize TiKV's capability of disaster recovery. This document describes how to configure labels.

> ## TiKV reports the topological information
> 
> In order for PD to get the topology of the cluster, TiKV reports the topological information to PD according to the startup parameter or configuration of TiKV. Assume that the topology has three structures: zone > rack > host, use labels to specify the following information for each TiKV:
> 
> - Startup parameter:
> 
>     ```bash
>     tikv-server --labels zone=<zone>,rack=<rack>,host=<host>
>     ```
> 
> - Configuration:
> 
>     ```toml
>     [server]
>     labels = "zone=<zone>,rack=<rack>,host=<host>"
>     ```
> ## PD understands the TiKV topology
> 
> After getting the topology of the TiKV cluster, PD also needs to know the hierarchical relationship of the topology. You can configure it through the PD configuration or `pd-ctl`:
> 
> - PD configuration:
> 
>     ```toml
>     [replication]
>     max-replicas = 3
>     location-labels = ["zone", "rack", "host"]
>     ```
> 
> - PD controller:
> 
>     ```toml
>     pd-ctl >> config set location-labels zone,rack,host
>     ```
> 
> You can find all the replication configuration options [here](../pd-configuration-file/#replication).
> 
> To make PD understand that the labels represents the TiKV topology, keep `location-labels` corresponding to the TiKV `labels` name. See the following example.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Declare the label hierarchy in PD

Labels are hierarchical, for example, `zone > rack > host`. You can declare it in the PD configuration file or `pd-ctl`:

- PD configuration file:

    ```toml
    [replication]
    max-replicas = 3
    location-labels = ["zone", "rack", "host"]
    ```

- pd-ctl:

    ```toml
    pd-ctl >> config set location-labels zone,rack,host
    ```

You can find all the replication configuration options [here](../pd-configuration-file/#replication).

## Declare the labels for each TiKV

Assume that the topology has three layers: `zone > rack > host`. You can set a label for each layer by command line or configuration file, then TiKV will report its label to PD:

- Command line parameter:

    ```bash
    tikv-server --labels zone=<zone>,rack=<rack>,host=<host>
    ```

- TiKV configuration file:

    ```toml
    [server]
    labels = "zone=<zone>,rack=<rack>,host=<host>"
    ```
```

> ### Example

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Example
```

If you use 3 replicas and hope that the TiKV cluster is always highly available even when a data zone goes down, you need at least 4 data zones.

Assume that you have 4 data zones, each zone has 2 racks, and each rack has 2 hosts. You can start 2 TiKV instances on each host as follows:

Startup TiKV:

```bash
# zone=z1
tikv-server --labels zone=z1,rack=r1,host=h1
tikv-server --labels zone=z1,rack=r1,host=h2
tikv-server --labels zone=z1,rack=r2,host=h1
tikv-server --labels zone=z1,rack=r2,host=h2

# zone=z2
tikv-server --labels zone=z2,rack=r1,host=h1
tikv-server --labels zone=z2,rack=r1,host=h2
tikv-server --labels zone=z2,rack=r2,host=h1
tikv-server --labels zone=z2,rack=r2,host=h2

# zone=z3
tikv-server --labels zone=z3,rack=r1,host=h1
tikv-server --labels zone=z3,rack=r1,host=h2
tikv-server --labels zone=z3,rack=r2,host=h1
tikv-server --labels zone=z3,rack=r2,host=h2

# zone=z4
tikv-server --labels zone=z4,rack=r1,host=h1
tikv-server --labels zone=z4,rack=r1,host=h2
tikv-server --labels zone=z4,rack=r2,host=h1
tikv-server --labels zone=z4,rack=r2,host=h2
```

Configure PD:

```bash
# use `pd-ctl` connect the PD:
$ pd-ctl
>> config set location-labels zone,rack,host
```

> Now the cluster can work well. 16 TiKV instances are distributed across 4 data zones, 8 racks and 16 machines. In this case, PD schedules different replicas of each datum to different data zones.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now PD will schedule replicas of the same `Region` to different data zones.
```

> - If one of the data zones goes down, the high availability of the TiKV cluster is not affected.
> - If the data zone cannot recover within a period of time, PD will remove the replica from this data zone.
> 
> PD maximizes the disaster recovery of the cluster according to the current topology. Therefore, if you want to reach a certain level of disaster recovery, deploy many machines in different sites according to the topology. The number of machines must be more than the number of `max-replicas`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If one data zone goes down, the TiKV cluster will still be highly available.
- If the data zone cannot recover within a period of time, PD will remove the replica from this data zone.

PD optimizes the failure tolerance base on the topology labels. The number of machines must be no less than the `max-replicas`.
```
